# Sparkify Data Pipelines with Airflow

## Context
A music streaming company, Sparkify, has decided that it is time to introduce more automation and monitoring to their data warehouse ETL pipelines and come to the conclusion that the best tool to achieve this is Apache Airflow.

They have decided to bring you into the project and expect you to create high grade data pipelines that are dynamic and built from reusable tasks, can be monitored, and allow easy backfills. They have also noted that the data quality plays a big part when analyses are executed on top the data warehouse and want to run tests against their datasets after the ETL steps have been executed to catch any discrepancies in the datasets.


## ETL Pipeline
The source data resides in S3 and needs to be processed in Sparkify's data warehouse in Amazon Redshift. The source datasets consist of JSON logs that tell about user activity in the application and JSON metadata about the songs the users listen to.

There are two ETL processes. The first ETL extracts the data from S3 and stages them in Redshift raw/staging tables. The second ETL is a sql to sql ETL which transform data from raw table into a set of dimensional/analytics tables.


## Database Schema
Star Schema is used on analytics tables to give users the ability to perform simple query with less joins and fast aggregations. The Fact Table records in log data associated with song plays. Using this table, the company can relate and analyze four dimensions users, songs, artists and time.

Fact Table: songplays
Dimension Tables: users, songs, artists and time.


### Dataset
The Song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

The Log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

- **Song datasets**: all json files are nested in subdirectories under */data/song_data*. A sample of this files is:

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

- **Log datasets**: all json files are nested in subdirectories under */data/log_data*. A sample of a single row of each files is:

```
{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}
```
